federalist 58
objection that the number of members
will not be augmented as the progress of
population demands considered
madison
to the people of the state of new york
the remaining charge against the house
of representatives which i am to examine
is grounded on the supposition that the
number of members will not be augmented
from time to time as the progress of
population may demand
it has been admitted that this objection
if well supported would have great
weight
the following observations will show
that like most other objections against
the constitution it can only proceed
from a partial view of the subject or
from a jealousy which discolors and
disfigures every object which is beheld
one
those who urge the objection seem not to
have recollected that the federal
constitution will not suffer by a
comparison with the state constitutions
in the security provided for a gradual
augmentation of the number of
representatives
the number which is to prevail in the
first instance is declared to be
temporary its duration is limited to the
short term of three years
within every successive term of ten
years a census of inhabitants is to be
repeated
the unequivocal objects of these
regulations are first to readjust from
time to time the apportionment of
representatives to the number of
inhabitants under the single exception
that each state shall have one
representative at least
secondly to augment the number of
representatives at the same periods
under the sole limitation that the whole
number shall not exceed one for every
thirty thousand inhabitants
if we review the constitutions of the
several states we shall find that some
of them contain no determinant
regulations on this subject that others
correspond pretty much on this point
with the federal constitution and that
the most effectual security in any of
them is resolvable into a mere directory
provision
two
as far as experience has taken place on
this subject a gradual increase of
representatives under the state
constitutions has at least kept pace
with that of the constituents and it
appears that the former have been as
ready to concur in such measures as the
latter have been to call for them
three
there is a peculiarity in the federal
constitution which ensures a watchful
attention in a majority both of the
people and of their representatives to a
constitutional augmentation of the
latter
the peculiarity lies in this that one
branch of the legislature is a
representation of citizens the other of
the states
in the former consequently the larger
states will have most weight in the
latter the advantage will be in favor of
the smaller states
from this circumstance it may with
certainty be inferred that the larger
states will be strenuous advocates for
increasing the number and weight of that
part of the legislature in which their
influence predominates and it so happens
that four only of the largest will have
a majority of the whole votes in the
house of representatives
should the representatives or people
therefore of the smaller states oppose
at any time a reasonable addition of
members a coalition of a very few states
will be sufficient to overrule the
opposition a coalition which
notwithstanding the rival ship and local
prejudices which might prevent it on
ordinary occasions would not fail to
take place when not merely prompted by
common interest but justified by equity
in the principles of the constitution
it may be alleged perhaps that the
senate would be prompted by like motives
to an adverse coalition and as their
concurrence would be indispensable the
just and constitutional views of the
other branch might be defeated
this is the difficulty which has
probably created the most serious
apprehensions in the jealous friends of
a numerous representation
fortunately it is among the difficulties
which existing only in appearance vanish
on a close and accurate inspection
the following reflections will if i
mistake not be admitted to be conclusive
and satisfactory on this point
notwithstanding the equal authority
which will subsist between the two
houses on all legislative subjects
except the originating of money bills it
cannot be doubted that the house
composed of the greater number of
members when supported by the more
powerful states and speaking the known
and determined sense of a majority of
the people will have no small advantage
in a question depending on the
comparative firmness of the two houses
this advantage must be increased by the
consciousness felt by the same side of
being supported in its demands by right
by reason and by the constitution and
the consciousness on the opposite side
of contending against the force of all
these solemn considerations
it is farther to be considered that in
the gradation between the smallest and
largest states there are several which
though most likely in general to arrange
themselves among the former are too
little removed in extent and population
from the latter to second in opposition
to their just and legitimate pretensions
hence it is by no means certain that a
majority of votes even in the senate
would be unfriendly to proper
augmentations in the number of
representatives
it will not be looking too far to add
that the senators from all the new
states may be gained over to the just
views of the house of representatives by
an expedient too obvious to be
overlooked as these states will for a
great length of time advance in
population with peculiar rapidity they
will be interested in frequent
reapportionments of the representatives
to the number of inhabitants
the large states therefore who will
prevail in the house of representatives
will have nothing to do but to make
reapportionments and augmentations
mutually conditions of each other and
the senators from all the most growing
states will be bound to contend for the
latter by the interest which their
states will feel in the former
these considerations seem to afford
ample security on this subject and ought
alone to satisfy all the doubts and
fears which have been indulged with
regard to it
admitting however that they should all
be insufficient to subdue the unjust
policy of the smaller states or their
predominant influence in the councils of
the senate a constitutional and
infallible resource still remains with
the larger states by which they will be
able at all times to accomplish their
just purposes
the house of representatives cannot only
refuse but they alone can propose the
supplies requisite for the support of
government
they in a word hold the purse that
powerful instrument by which we behold
in the history of the british
constitution an infant and humble
representation of the people gradually
enlarging the sphere of its activity and
importance and finally reducing as far
as it seems to have wished all the
overgrown prerogatives of the other
branches of the government
this power over the purse may in fact be
regarded as the most complete and
effectual weapon with which any
constitution can arm the immediate
representatives of the people for
obtaining a redress of every grievance
and for carrying into effect every just
and salutory measure but will not the
house of representatives be as much
interested as the senate in maintaining
the government in its proper functions
and will they not therefore be unwilling
to stake its existence or its reputation
on the pliancy of the senate or if such
a trial of firmness between the two
branches were hazarded would not the one
be as likely first to yield as the other
these questions will create no
difficulty with those who reflect that
in all cases the smaller the number and
the more permanent and conspicuous the
station of men in power the stronger
must be the interest which they will
individually feel in whatever concerns
the government
those who represent the dignity of their
country in the eyes of other nations
will be particularly sensible to every
prospect of public danger or of
dishonorable stagnation in public
affairs
to those causes we are to ascribe the
continual triumph of the british house
of commons over the other branches of
the government whenever the engine of a
money bill has been employed
an absolute inflexibility on the side of
the latter although it could not have
failed to involve every department of
the state in the general confusion has
neither been apprehended nor experienced
the utmost degree of firmness that can
be displayed by the federal senate or
president will not be more than equal to
a resistance in which they will be
supported by constitutional and
patriotic principles
in this review of the constitution of
the house of representatives i have
passed over the circumstances of economy
which in the present state of affairs
might have had some effect in lessening
the temporary number of representatives
and a disregard of which would probably
have been as rich a theme of declaration
against the constitution as has been
shown by the smallness of the number
proposed
i omit also any remarks on the
difficulty which might be found under
present circumstances in engaging in the
federal service a large number of such
characters as the people will probably
elect
one observation however i must be
permitted to add on this subject as
claiming in my judgment a very serious
attention it is that in all legislative
assemblies the greater the number
composing them may be the fewer will be
men who will in fact direct their
proceedings in the first place the more
numerous an assembly may be of whatever
characters composed the greater is known
to be the ascendancy of passion over
reason
in the next place the larger the number
the greater will be the proportion of
members of limited information and of
weak capacities
now it is precisely on characters of
this description that the eloquence and
address of the few are known to act with
all their force
in the ancient republics where the whole
body of the people assembled in person a
single orator or an artful statesman was
generally seen to rule with his complete
a sway as if a scepter had been placed
in his single hand
on the same principle the more
multitudinous a representative assembly
may be rendered the more it will partake
of the infirmities incident to
collective meetings of the people
ignorance will be the dupe of cunning
and passion the slave of sophistry and
declaration
the people can never air more in
supposing that by multiplying their
representatives beyond a certain limit
they strengthen the barrier against the
government of a few
experience will forever admonish them
that on the contrary after securing a
sufficient number for the purposes of
safety of local information and of
diffusive sympathy with the whole
society they will counteract their own
views by every addition to their
representatives
the countenance of the government may
become more democratic but the soul that
animates it will be more oligarchic the
machine will be enlarged but the fewer
and often more secret will be the
springs by which its motions are
directed
as connected with the objection against
the number of representatives may
properly be here noticed that which has
been suggested against the number made
competent for legislative business it
has been said that more than a majority
ought to have been required for a quorum
and in particular cases if not in all
more than a majority of a quorum for a
decision
that some advantages might have resulted
from such a precaution cannot be denied
it might have been an additional shield
to some particular interests and another
obstacle generally to hasty and partial
measures but these considerations are
outweighed by the inconveniences in the
opposite scale
in all cases where justice or the
general good might require new laws to
be passed or active measures to be
pursued
the fundamental principle of free
government would be reversed
it would be no longer the majority that
would rule the power would be
transferred to the minority
where the defense of privilege limited
to particular cases an interested
minority might take advantage of it to
screen themselves from equitable
sacrifices to the general wheel or in
particular emergencies to extort
unreasonable indulgences
lastly it would facilitate and foster
the painful practice of successions a
practice which has shown itself even in
states where a majority only is required
a practice subversive of all the
principles of order and regular
government a practice which leads more
directly to public convulsions and the
ruin of popular governments than any
other which has yet been displayed among
us
publius